what if i told you that there was a
special type of lens that among many
other cool uses
allows you to take a picture of a mirror
straight on
without getting any of the camera in the
reflection at all
yes there is such a thing and i'm going
to tell you about it so prepare to have
your mind blown before we jump in
it is essential that i do my shameless
plugs of course if you haven't seen my
incredible instagram account
it has the most amazing tech memes you
could possibly imagine so be sure to
check that out it's just
theojo over on instagram if you want to
collapse from laughing so hard
and with all that out of the way though
let's get started these days considering
everyone has a camera right in their
pocket
when it comes to taking a picture you've
probably got it figured out
you just make sure the thing you want to
photograph is in focus so it's not
blurry
and then the things in front and behind
it a certain distance will be out of
focus but there is one type of lens that
most of you have probably never heard of
that will completely change what you
think you know it's called
a tilt shift lens and even if you have
heard of it
you might just know it as that weird
effect that makes things look miniature
but the capabilities of these lenses are
so much stranger than that so let's get
into what these lenses can do
the two unique abilities of these lenses
are called tilting and shifting wow big
surprise
the first one we'll go over is shifting
which is actually really easy to
understand
and allows that weird ability to take
pictures of mirrors i mentioned at the
beginning you see how every lens works
is the light comes in one end
and out the other end projecting what's
called an image circle
and then you put the image sensor or
film in that circle
and it captures a portion of it to form
an image the bigger the sensor size
the bigger the image circle needed to
cover it a normal camera lens you buy
is specifically designed to have an
image circle just big enough to cover
the sensor
but a tilt shift lens is different it
has an image circle
much larger than a typical lens and on
the lens itself
allows you to literally shift the lens
side to side or up and down therefore
changing where the sensor is located in
the image circle
therefore shifting the image you might
think well what's the point of that why
not just
move the camera itself left or right or
just put it up higher on the tripod
but it's not the same a shift of just a
few millimeters
may be the equivalent of moving the lens
anywhere from a few feet to
a hundred feet or more depending on the
focal length this allows some abilities
that would be impossible
with a regular lens for example if you
wanted to take a picture of a tall
building
you'd probably have to point the camera
upwards which makes the building look
warped with the lines converging towards
the top
with a tilt shift lens though you can
just point the camera level with the
ground
then shift the lens up so the lines all
stay parallel and vertical to do that
with the normal lens
you'd have to be high up in the air at
the center of the building to get the
same picture with the vertical lines
and now here's how to do the thing with
the mirror if you want to take a picture
of a mirror with a regular camera
without being in the reflection you have
to stand way off to the side and turn
the camera at a strong angle which is
very obvious that you're not looking
straight into it with a tilt shift lens
you still need to place the camera just
off to the side of the mirror but
you can point it perpendicular to the
mirror then shift the lens so the
perspective looks like
it's just pointed directly into it but
it's not shifting is also good for
example for taking panoramas that you
stitch together
you can simply shift the lens to the
sides taking multiple pictures and then
stitch them together
so you don't have any weird distortion
like you might get if you did the same
thing by turning the camera so that's
the shifting but what about
tilting well this is actually my
favorite and it's where things get
really weird
as you probably know when you focus a
camera there's a plane of focus
that you can move forward and backwards
and that plane
is always parallel to the sensor or the
film we call the sensor plane but when
you tilt a lens
and keep the sensor plane the same
something very strange happens
the focal plane actually rotates
and tilts in the same direction as the
lens this allows you extreme control
over what's in focus
so say you have a row of objects you all
want in focus
instead of having to reduce the aperture
to increase the depth of field
you can just rotate the depth of field
so it's still shallow
but still gets everything in focus for
example a lot of landscape photographers
actually use tilt shift lenses
then tilt the focal plane forward so
they can basically get the entire
landscape perfectly in focus
instead of having to just focus on
infinity sacrificing
some of the focus closer in the scene
another cool use is the miniature effect
you've probably seen
and this is actually the result of
aiming the whole camera downwards
and then tilting the lens upwards
therefore tilting the focal plane
backwards this results in only a tiny
amount of the scene intersecting with
the focal plane
therefore creating a very shallow depth
of field despite
being not very zoomed in so it tricks
our brain into thinking
we must be zooming in on something very
small now i still want to clarify some
things because the way the focusing
works
is not as simple as tilting the lens and
the focal plane just tilts by the same
amount
the actual way the focal plane relates
to the tilt
is called the shine flu principle but
i'll try to simplify it as best i can
without getting into the math of it
basically
as you tilt the lens imagine some lines
extending from the sensor plane
the lens plane and the focal plane when
there is no
tilt all of these are parallel and
vertical but
as you tilt the lens forward by any
amount what happens
is the focal plane also tilts by an
angle
such that all three planes intersect at
a single point
no matter what this means the actual
tilt of the focal plane is determined by
both the
tilt angle of the lens and how far the
lens is from the camera an interesting
consequence of this
is that when the lens is tilted if you
try to focus
that also rotates the focal plane
further so you can get a
ton of tilt from the focal plane with
just a tiny bit of tilting the actual
lens
so yes even to the point of the plane
literally being perpendicular
to the sensor plane now if all this
sounds amazing you might be surprised to
find out that none of this
is new the exact math of the shine fluke
principle
was derived right around the early 1900s
but photographers knew about using
tilting and shifting in lenses
since the very beginning of photography
itself in fact back in the days
of cameras with bellows they basically
all were capable
of moving the lens around to do the same
movements as a tilt shift lens
so this is a rare instance where modern
cameras actually
lost a feature that used to be in all
cameras these old style cameras are
still around though
and if you follow me on instagram you
may have seen my large format camera i
bought recently
and this is a field camera so it's made
to be slightly more portable than other
big bellows cameras
but it still can do all the same
movements as i described
so you can shift the lens in any
direction and also
tilt the lens side to side or forward
and backwards and what's nice about
these old style cameras
is you can do all of these movements no
matter what lens you use
as long as it covers the film obviously
and you can also
tilt or shift the lens by any amount
even to an extreme degree
as long as the resulting image circle
can still cover the film
so fun fact one spec you need to
consider when buying an old lens like
this
is the size of the image circle it
produces which is
never something you need to consider
with modern lenses
because they're standardized and don't
need to do any tilting and shifting now
there are some things i should point out
in regards to tilt shift lenses
when it comes to shifting you might be
wondering if instead of shifting using
tilt shift
if you could just use a wider angle lens
and actually
yes technically you could if you were to
look at the full image circle of a tilt
shift lens
it would produce the same image as a
wider angle lens
but the difference is with the wider
angle lens you have to use the whole
sensor on the whole image so to get the
same
image as a tilt shift lens you'd have to
crop it down a lot
therefore losing a ton of quality a tilt
shift lens basically lets you take a
really wide angle lens
but only capture whatever part of it you
want at a higher quality
because you're using the whole image
sensor on just that part
makes sense but remember that just
applies to the shifting you can't
replicate
the tilt feature using any other lens
you need one that can physically tilt
the lens
now by this point you might be wondering
how to get your hands on one of these
lenses
and unfortunately they're some of the
more expensive lenses out there because
not only does the manufacturing have to
provide additional controls for tilting
and shifting for features
they also need extremely high quality
optics to be able to project such a
large image circle an alternative to
shifting
could be to just get an extremely wide
angle lens and cropping it down
but remember that will reduce the
resolution of the image substantially
as for tilting the lens you might see
lots of photo
editing effects like on instagram called
tilt shift
which can do the effect where it blurs
everything except a certain part of the
image
but these obviously can't do the more
useful ability of the tilt shift lens
which is to get more in focus now one
possible exception to all this would be
tilt shift adapters
which would go between the camera sensor
and the lens then
allowing you to add tilting and shifting
i know there are tilt shift adapters for
really high end cameras like hasselblads
but i'm not sure if they really exist
for typical full-frame cameras
or even aps-c so you might be able to do
a lot of searching and find something
like that but i haven't seen too much
about it but anyway that pretty much
covers it let me know what you think
down in the comments
the next video i'd recommend watching is
one i made with 10 awesome computer
accessories under 50
i'll put that link right here if you
want to watch that so thanks again for
watching guys be sure to subscribe
and let me know what you think and i'll
see in the next video